does your audio have a good total
balance or does it need fixing
and if it does need fixing how would you
talk about it learn audio online with
audio masterclass
audiomasterclass.com tonal balance is a
popular term for
frequency balance meaning the relative
levels of the various frequencies in a
piece of audio
which may be a single instrument a
complete music mix
speech or sound effects at audio
masterclass
we prefer frequency balance because it
specifically refers to frequency and
level
frequency is measured in hertz and level
can be measured in decibels
so it's an objective parameter as well
as subjective
tonal balance is subjective and there
are no formal
units meaning that it can't be measured
objectively having said that tonal
balance is a commonly used term
and i'll use it here to mean frequency
balance it's useful to be able to
describe
tonal balance in words so that producers
engineers and musicians
can communicate efficiently and they are
informal and perhaps a little bit vague
rather than formal and precise even so
they are useful aids for communication
so i could say the sound is rather boxy
rather than the lower mid-range around
400 hertz needs to come down by six
decibels
the latter may be more precise but it
isn't the way people normally talk
even seasoned audio professionals here's
a quick list of words commonly used to
describe tonal balance
in no particular order fat thin bright
aggressive smooth dark dull or muffled
air or airy harsh nasal or honky
muddy presence or bite scoot or smile
curve hollow or boxy coming up are audio
demonstrations to show you what these
words are normally
understood to mean but before i get onto
the demonstrations
a newcomer to audio would need at least
a very basic introduction to
equalization
to aid their further understanding so
for viewers who need it
this short clip will help you get a
feeling for eq quickly
if you are familiar with eq already then
you can skip it
i'll put a timestamp just here
[Music]
there are a few important caveats to the
demonstrations coming up
one piece of music is used for all of
the examples different music would react
differently to eq according to the
instruments used
and their respective frequency balances
tonal balance applies to speech
and sound effects also the music used
already has a fairly even tonal balance
meaning that the various bands of
frequencies are well balanced
and need no improvement eq is used to
demonstrate the problems of tonal
balance so the examples are used to
create tonal balance issues
rather than resolve them if a piece of
audio had a tonal balance problem
similar to any of the examples an
inverse eq curve
would be required to resolve it the
settings are approximate in terms of
frequency
and the amount of cut or boost this is
due to the overall subjectivity
involved some of the examples are
exaggerated for clarity
okay here we go
the term fat can be used for matters
other than frequency balance
for example a bass guitar with flat
round strings
can sound fatter than a similar bass
guitar with round round strings but when
referring to frequency balance
it's often used to mean a strong low
frequency region
thick is sometimes used but not as often
but it would normally mean the same as
fat the frequency range would generally
be
around 100 hertz and lower
[Music]
clearly the opposite of fat is thin thin
generally means a weak low frequency
region
the frequency range involved would be
around 200 hertz and
lower
[Music]
bright refers to a moderate high
frequency boost
generally above around two to three
[Music]
kilohertz
do
[Music]
aggressive is similar to bright but
there's a greater degree of boost
again above around two to three
kilohertz it isn't always bad to have an
aggressive sound
but it does depend on the kind of sound
source you're working with an aggressive
guitar solo in a rock track
could work perfectly well
[Music]
smooth generally means a slow roll off
in high frequency energy
above around 1 to 2 kilohertz not so
much that the overall sound is perceived
as
lacking in high frequencies but not as
bright as properly tonally balanced
audio would be a smooth tonal balance
can often be useful when audio is used
as a background
as a music bet beneath narration for
instance
[Music]
dark is when there is a definite lack of
high frequency energy
but not too much in the context of how
the audio is used
dark is generally used as a positive
term again a dark sound could work well
with a tonally balanced narration
or in a music mix it would be perfectly
acceptable for a featured instrument or
vocal to have
a dark tone if it works well
subjectively
[Music]
dull and muffled are used when there is
definitely too little high frequency
content
a smooth or dark tonal balance can work
well if used appropriately
a dull or muffled tonal balance is
unless for a specific effect
normally considered a fault that should
be corrected
[Music]
unlike most of the other words described
and demonstrated here
air is often used as a noun in
preference to the adjective
airy give it some more air said the
producer to the engineer for example
air is usually a boost at very high
frequencies some of which will not be
audible to many people the ear's high
frequency response deteriorates with age
it's important therefore that some of
the air extends to frequencies that
almost everyone can hear
which would be around eight or nine
kilohertz so air
should be applied above that
[Music]
a harsh tonal balance is one that's
unpleasant to the ear
and would make a listener want to turn
down the volume a harsh tonal balance is
almost
always a bad thing in this example the
frequency range around
two to seven kilohertz is boosted which
is a band where the ear is very
sensitive
in order to hear speech clearly
[Music]
we call this a nasal tonal balance in
comparison with the human voice
when the person speaking has a cold and
that nasal passages are blocked
we could also compare the term honky
with the sound of a klaxon
in this example the frequency range
around 600 hertz
to 2 kilohertz is boosted
[Music]
the term muddy can be used when there's
too much energy in the lower mid
frequency band
in this example there's a boost centered
on 150 hertz
extending from 20 hertz up to around 2
kilohertz
[Music]
again we have nouns rather than
adjectives and although present is a
perfectly good adjective
it isn't in common use to describe tonal
balance the vocal has plenty of presence
would be typical usage or the snare
needs more bite to achieve this
a smallish boost in the region around
three kilohertz or so can be applied
[Music]
the scooped or smile curve tonal balance
is where the low and high frequency
regions are strong
and there's a reduction in energy over a
wide band in the mid-range this kind of
tonal balance is often applied to a mix
because it's common that as the
individual tracks are optimized and
blended together
then the mid-range frequencies will
build up in level and
require correction it could be said that
a good mix engineer should correct for
this as they go along but in practice
it's always likely that the final mix
will require a tonal balance adjustment
and the use of the smile curve is fairly
[Music]
common
where the scooped or small curve tonal
balance is generally a fairly subtle
effect
the hollow tonal balance can be easily
audible
and require correction the hollow tonal
balance is most noticeable
where there's a lack of energy in a
fairly narrow band
one kilohertz
[Music]
this is the tonal balance you hear if
you place a cardboard box
over your head and listen to the sounds
around you it occurs because of the
resonance of the enclosed volume inside
the box it can also be noticeable in a
vocal booth
with inadequate acoustic treatment in
this example the boxy resonance is
centered on 400 hertz
and extends from around 200 up to 800
hertz
[Music]
in summary although these informal terms
are not precise
and are subject to individual
interpretation they are in common use
professionally and should be understood
both for following the requirements of a
client or producer
or for giving instructions to an
engineer or collaborator
i'm david miller course director of
audio masterclass thank you for
listening
you